In this lecture, you'll learn about HSRP, Cisco's Hot Standby Router Protocol. HSRP uses a Virtual IP (VIP)
and MAC address to allow for automated gateway failover.
So you see in the example here, we've got R1 and R2, which are going to be redundant default gateways
for our PCs in the 10.10.10.0 subnet. R1 and R1, they both got interface gigabitEthernet0/1
facing the PCs, and HSRP is configured at the interface level.
R1 has got physical IP address 10.10.10.2 and R2 has got physical IP address
10.10.10.3.
We configure a virtual IP address of 10.10.10.1
in the example. The two routers will negotiate for HSRP, one will become active and one will be
the standby.
The active router will be active for the virtual IP address of 10.10.10.1 and the associated virtual
MAC address.
They send keep alives to each other, both routers.
If R2 stops receiving those hellos, it will realize that R1 has gone down, and it will then take over
ownership of the 10.10.10.1 virtual IP address and the MAC address.
So on the PCs, we just configure them to use 10.10.10.1 as their default gateway.
They're completely unaware about HSRP. It's transparent to them. As far as they're concerned,
they just have one gateway at 10.10.10.1.
They don't know that there's redundant gateways there.
They don't know if there's a failover and the failover all happens automatically.
Both routers have a normal physical IP address and MAC address on their HSRP interface. Unique addresses
are used for the physical addresses on both routers.
If you wanted to check that, you could do a 'show interface' on the interface,
you'll see the IP address and the MAC address is going to be different on both.
They both also have the HSRP, virtual IP, and MAC address configured on that interface.
The same addresses are used on both routers here.
When they come online, one is elected the HSRP active router, the other is the standby.
So, HSRP does not do load balancing for PCs that are in the same IP subnet.
The active router owns the virtual IP and MAC address and responds to ARP requests coming from the PCs.
So all traffic for the virtual IP address goes through the active router.
The routers send hello messages to each other over their HSRP interface.
So going back to our example, when they're sending those hello messages to each other as keep alives,
when R1 sends it to R2, it uses 10.10.10.2 as the source address, 10.10.10.3
is the destination address, and vice versa for the hello packets coming from R2 to R1.
If the standby router stops receiving those hellos from the active, it realizes that it's gone
down and it will transition to be the new active router, and it will then take ownership of the virtual IP and
MAC address, and it will now respond to the ARP requests from the PCs. So looking at the configuration,
it's very simple.
On R1, for example, we say 'interface gigabitEthernet0/1'.
The physical IP address 10.10.10.2
255.255.255.0, 'no shutdown',
so that's just standard interface configuration. For HSRP,
we just want to enter one additional command, which is 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1'. HSRP uses the
standby command.
We do a matching configuration over on R2. It's also an 'interface gigabitEthernet0/1'.
Here,
the IP address is 10.10.10.3,
'no shutdown', and 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1'.
So a different physical IP address on both routers, the same standby address on both routers.
So, that is the configuration. To verify it,
we do a 'show standby'.
I'll come out of fullscreen mode,
so I can highlight some of these entries that you see under the 'show standby' command.
So 'show standby'
will show what the virtual IP address is,
you can see that the state is currently active.
You can also see what the virtual MAC address is here as well.
Remember, if you want to see the actual physical MAC address, as you would do a 'show interface', the physical
MAC and the virtual IP address are going to be different IP addresses.
In here, I can see them on R1.
R1 is currently the active router. The standby router is R2 at 10.10.10.3.
Okay, so that's the theory,
and the configuration and verification. Let's actually do the configuration in the lab.
It's the same example that I used in the slides there.
So let's jump on to R1 first,
and if I just 'show ip interface brief', you'll see that there's no configuration on the gigabitEthernet0/1 port yet,
I've done the rest of the upstream configuration though. So I'll go to global config, and on interface
gigabitEthernet0/1,
the physical IP address is 10.10.10.2, with a subnet mask of 255.255.255.0, and 'no shut',
so my standard interface configuration. For HSRP,
I say
'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1'.
So that's R1 configured,
I need to do a matching configuration on R2. So I'll go to global config and interface gigabitEthernet0/1.
IP address is 10.10.10.3 here,
so the physical IP addresses have to be different,
it's /24 subnet mask again,
'no shut'.
And then the same command for HSRP, which was 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1'.
So, that's all my configuration done.
It does take a little while for HSRP to come up. Up to about a minute when you've got the default timers.
So rather than waffling on for a minute, I will pause the video.
Oh, I don't need to pause the video.
It just came up. Okay,
that was convenient.
So let's go back to the enable prompt and do a 'show standby',
and I can see that it shows that HSRP Group 1 is active and the active router is local,
so it came up as active on R2.
That's because the higher IP address will be preferred by default and the standby router is R1
at 10.10.10.2. If I go on to one of my PCs,
so I have to go on to Packet Tracer for this, and I'll go on to PC1, and go to the Desktop, and open up a command
prompt and I can ping 10.10.10.1,
and that is successful. And if I do an 'arp-a' to see the MAC address, the MAC address being
used for the default gateway ends in ac01.
Let's go back on to R2,
and I can see that that is the HSRP MAC address.
If I do a 'show interface gig0/1', you'll see that the physical MAC address is different.
Okay, so that was HSRP,
how to the configuration, how to verify it.
See you in the next lecture where we'll cover some more advanced HSRP topics.